>> Patrick Beard: Good afternoon.
I'm Patrick Beard.
And during the first half of this session I'm
going to be talking about advancements we made
to the Objective-C and garbage collection runtime systems.
Later on, Blaine Garst will be coming
up and telling you about Blocks,
a major advancement we've made
to the C programming language.
So first up, I'm going to talk about performance.
And this is the kind of performance that everybody likes.
It's for free when you run your programs on Snow Leopard.
So before Leopard, there was prebinding.
Shared libraries had their own assigned address
ranges, which were maintained by update prebinding,
and they were all loaded one at a
time, memory mapped, one at a time.
In Leopard, we added the shared library cache.
This cache is copies of all the prebound shared
libraries, and memory announced them all at once.
And by doing that, we saved space, we saved
time, we're able to share all these libraries
across all the processes of a particular architecture.
And at launch time, performance was significantly improved.
In Snow Leopard, Objective-C is
now part of the shared cache.
All of the selectors used by all of the Cocoa
frameworks are stored in a unique table,
and all the references to them are
fixed up in all the shared libraries.
That amounts to about 700 K of
shared data in a 64-bit processd.
That sharing allows processes to launch even faster.
But we also sped up message send.
The Objective-C 64-bit Compiledr now knows about a set of
16 selectors, which it uses-it speeds up the calls to those
by using a hybrid virtual function table.
So there's a few of the selectors in that list,
you know, the common ones you might expect.
And we only use the top 16 for various, important reason.
That speed up that you get by doing
this comes at a cost, a space cost.
It's an extra word per call site, and of
course it's the 16 words for the Vtable.
But this set of selectors covers
about 70% of all message sends
that happen globally in all programs, all Cocoa programs.
So we're able to speed up by about 40% all of
these calls without increasing space usage to much.
So we save space in the previous optimization, and here
we're using a little bit of that space to get some speed.
Also, RV tables, unlike C++, are non fragile,
just like we have non-fragile instance variables.
So there's no C++ style release
to release binary incompatibility.
The Vtable slots are actually assigned at runtime,
and can actually be unassigned and unused.
You'll occasionally find that you have some methods
you want to call that would be using a Vtable dispatch
and retained release code, but not in GC.
I'll tell you more about that in a minute.
So to get a feel for the gist of how this stuff works, let's
look at a simple program that sums an array of NSNumbers.
Object at index is one of those accelerated selectors.
So let's zoom in to the message send.
For every unique message send in a program and across all
the frameworks, there is a message structure generated
by the compiler, it's static, and it contains two entries.
The selector and a function to call
to actually do the message send.
First time it's called, the message
send function is message send fix up.
This is where the Vtable slot assignment it done,
and it changes the actual message
structure and converts it to the faster one.
So all subsequent calls go through that.
As I said earlier, this one takes
about seven instructions to execute
versus the 20 or so of the standard GCC message send.
So it's fast, because it's a direct
map, doesn't have to do any hashing.
When you're debugging Vtable dispatch code, you'll
see some changes when you're looking at the symbols.
You might encounter objc message
send fix up, which I showed you.
Objc message send fixed up will appear when you
make a call that was supposed to be a Vtable dispatch,
but it didn't actually end up using a Vtable dispatch.
This would be like retain and release
in garbage collection mode.
The runtime says we don't need to
accelerate those, they don't do anything.
So when you see these symbols in the debugger, don't worry
about it, don't panic, it's just like GCC message send.
You can step through your methods as ever.
So that's Vtable dispatch.
We've also enhanced the CrashReporter
so it can give you more information
in the unlikely event that your program crashes.
[ Laughter ]
>> When you call objc message send,
the old style crash logs look like this.
You just saw some obscure information, you go look at the
register, you scratch your head, you go, what happened?
Well, I know something from this
method that caused the crash.
The new one gives you the name of
the selector you're trying to send.
[ Applause ]
>> Thanks a lot, Greg.
So I don't think you're going to applaud
for this, but the next feature I want
to talk about is synthesized instance variables.
So in Objective-C 2.0, you can actually synthesize
the accessor methods for your properties.
And if you're using the 64-bit ABI or the iPhone
OS, you can leave the instance variables out.
Unfortunately, there was one glitch.
The compiler would generate the instance variable,
add it to the class, but you couldn't touch it.
You couldn't actually reference it by name.
So this is fixed in the Snow Leopard compiler,
GCC 42, and Clang now, both can handle this.
But if you're writing code that needs to compile
for iPhone or the Simulator, just go ahead
and declare the instance variable, it works just fine.
So now I want to talk about a brand new feature
of the Objective-C runtime in Snow Leopard.
It's called associative references.
So imagine you're writing an application, and you
get the bright idea to have whenever a window --
every unique window kind comes to front, plays a sound.
So you could model this, using a category.
You just say, well, all my Windows
will have a property called sound.
And you could use key notifications and use that
category, and see if the sound exists yet, dynamic,
or lazily bind it to the window like this.
So whenever the sound window comes from
front, a sound is loaded and it's played.
Whenever the window goes to the back
or is no longer front, it stops.
So how would you write a category like this?
When a language like JavaScript, dynamic scripting language,
you can add instance variables on the fly, it's no problem.
But Objective-C doesn't support instance
variables being added to objects on the fly.
So we have a couple of problems we
need to solve to make this work.
One is where are you going to store the sound, where
do you put it, and then how do you retrieve is later.
So this seems like an ideal candidate for
a map table, a global map table stored
in a global variable, it's off to the side.
And it would use weak keys and strong values.
But if you're writing a garbage collected program,
which I hope you are, this can cause subtle leaks
if the value object points back to the key.
It creates an uncollectable cycle.
That's because the map table is global.
It's not a problem in this case, because
the sound doesn't point to the window.
The harder problem is life time.
How do we find out that the window has gone away
or is about to go away so it can clean up after it.
In this particular case, we get a
notification that windows close.
But in general, you might want to try
to solve this problem by subclassing.
But this particular scenario we want
to actually catch every window type,
NS Windows and NS Panels, and Save Panels and things.
And some of them we're not going to be able to subclass.
So the solution, it's very simple.
We have a new API called Associative References.
This is a complete implementation of that category.
So notice there's a static variable called Sound Key.
The address of this variable is what's important here.
It is used as a globally unique identifier that
represents the association between a window and a sound.
So to create an association between two
objects you call a set associative object.
You pass a pointer to an object, in this case, the window.
The key, which is the unique identifier,
the sound, which is the value object,
and a final parameter that's called the policy.
In this case, the property attribute
said we're going to retain the sound.
So this tells the associative reference system, go
ahead, when you create the association, call retain.
So here's the API -- a piece of it,
there is another function for getting.
But you'll notice these policies are defined to correspond
to the property attributes assign, retain, and copy.
So it's very easy to implement properties
in terms of associative references.
In fact, I would say it would be a really
good idea to be able to synthesize properties.
There's no syntax for this yet.
So there you have it.
In Snow Leopard, Objective-C programs launch
faster, the common selectors are accelerated,
and you now have the freedom to associate
arbitrary objects with each other.
Pretty cool stuff.
So now I'm going to tell you about what we've done
to improve garbage collection for Snow Leopard.
So in Snow Leopard, or since Leopard, all Cocoa frameworks
and all Core Foundation frameworks
have supported garbage collection.
We added a ton more frameworks for you to use, we still
support that, we're going to be supporting that from now on.
What's more, 64-bit applications, the system
applications, system references, and screen saver
and automator are now using GC in 64-bit mode.
So Apple is embracing 64-bit and GC at the same time,
and we would like to encourage everybody to do the same.
In Snow Leopard, garbage collection runs even faster.
In Leopard, the garbage collector runs in two modes.
Full collections, which collect lots of
objects, and generational collection,
which doesn't collect as many,
but it runs about twice as fast.
The generational collector was designed
with short-lived objects in mind.
The thread-local collector is based on the hypothesis
that there are lots of threads-there are going to be lots
of threads in Snow Leopard that
allocate lots of temporary objects.
This is actually the same rationale
behind the Autorelease pool itself.
You make an object on a thread,
you put it in the autorelease pool,
you're done with it, it goes away on that same thread.
The thread-local collector provides even faster
allocation because it uses a thread local cache.
It also collects faster, because all it has to do is look at
one thread's stack and all the objects reachable from that.
So the full and generational collectors run in about a time
that's proportional to the size of your program's heap.
The Thread Local Collector is more efficient.
It only has to collect as many objects
as a particular thread is allocating.
It also is able to return that memory that it
collects directly back to its allocation cache.
Which is a huge efficiency win.
And it's more scaleable.
As I said, the amount of memory it has to look at
is proportional to the thread, the single thread.
So each thread-local collector
only has to worry about one thread.
The thread-local collector only
manages a particular set of objects,
a particular size range, between 1 and 96 bytes in 64-bit.
But all the classes on Snow Leopard, 68%
of them are in that size range, in fact,
99% of the objects we provide,
their classes are less than 1 K.
So it simplifies the collector to only
support the smaller size; it makes it faster.
And also only supports objects that have retained counts of
zero, which is what you get when you create Cocoa objects.
CoreFoundation objects start off with retained count 1,
and you have to see if you release them to get rid of them.
They're off the table for now.
So the Thread Local Collector, or TLC for short,
so I don't trip over it too much, works
best if you trigger it explicitly.
If you happen to know there are some objects that are
ready to be collected, then you can use one of these APIs.
You can use the Autorelease pool API.
That works great if you're writing code like,
well, a System Preferences pane, for example,
which needs to be retained, released
in 32-bit, and 64-bit GC.
Otherwise, you can use the garbage collector, ask
garbage collector API, or, obviously, collect.
When you do that, you're only actually giving a hint.
If you want to force the collector
to run and you want to see
if an object will go away you can use exhaustive collection.
And that is provided us also in two flavors.
That will always run TLC on the current thread, and it will
push the background collector to run even more aggressively.
Thread local objects-we call them local for short.
If they escape the control of the thread
local collector we say they go global.
This happens in response to calling CFRetain, for example.
When you call CFRetain, this makes
an object ineligible for collection.
It allows you to store that object anywhere.
You can store it in malloced memory, and
the collector wouldn't get rid of it.
Well then the thread local collector
won't get rid of it either.
Simply assigning it to a global
variable does the same thing.
We use a right barrier, and that
tells the thread local collector
where the objects are being stored,
if it's about to lose control of them.
Also, the weak or associative references,
if you use that, objects stop being local.
The reason is those systems use locks,
and we can keep TLC really fast.
Finally, if you have a local object and
you assign it into an instance variable
of an already global object, that will make it go global.
A good example is you create a new view, and
you put it into the view hierarchy of a window.
That causes all the objects connected
to that view to go global.
So now a couple of cautionary statements.
You probably know this, or maybe you learned
it the hard way, but it deserves repeating.
When you use the autorelease pool, objects might go away.
Their dealloc methods might be called.
Dealloc methods can take locks.
If you happen to be holding locks from your
code, it's probably a bad idea to call drain,
because you might dead lock your own code.
The same is true, now, under garbage
collection with thread local collection.
Same thing can happen, a finalized
method might be taking a lock.
So if you hold locks, don't call into the collector.
And better yet, don't write finalized methods
at all, or finalized methods that take locks.
So that's the collector, that's Thread Local Collection.
Now I want to talk about our performance tools.
Instruments has been enhanced to know a lot
more about Garbage Collection in Snow Leopard.
The garbage collector instrument can actually show
you a log of all the collections that have occurred,
and it will tell you their kind
and how much time they're taking.
So right here I'm showing a local collection has run, and
it collected 100 objects, and it did that in about a third
of the time of a generational collection,
which also is collecting 100 objects.
As I said before, the time to run these collections are
proportional to the number of objects being managed.
Also over here on the right side is the
stack crawl where that collection occurred.
So you can monitor where you're calling into the collector.
It's a great idea to call in on a shallow stack,
because more likely, there's more garbage to collect.
The object graph instrument tells you
about how your objects are connected
to each other and to the heap and to global variables.
So here I'm showing a path from a global
object, the NSApplication, to its delegate.
And here it actually shows the name of the
instance variable that's connecting it.
So you can use this to look at long
chains of objects to get a grip
on why an object isn't going away, what it's connected to.
You can get a snapshot of this connectivity.
Finally, the leaks instrument works with garbage collection.
The only objects you're going to see in this list
are objects that have a retain count that's non-zero.
Because those are the only objects that
can leak in a garbage collection program.
The other kind of leak is over
rooting, but we don't show that here.
And we don't really call it a leak.
You can go find it in the object graph.
We also show the list of leaks and over here on
the other side, we show the allocation stack crawl,
which is a really important way to start finding leaks.
Look where it's allocated.
Now I want to talk about GDB.
GDB is always available when you're debugging in
Xcode or on the command line for you diehards.
So we added three new commands to it.
They're all prefixed with info
One is totally general purpose.
It accesses the malloc history information.
You set up a particular environment variable and
the allocator stack crawls for all the allocations.
Well, it also works in garbage collection mode.
And it tells you about all the places objects were
allocated and all the places the collector got rid of them.
So you can find out why an object that maybe
is corrupted doesn't exist any more with it.
Very handy for that kind of debugging.
Info GC-references gives you all the pointers
to a particular object that there are.
And GC roots gives you all the pointers plus all
the paths from the roots that lead to your object.
So this gives you similar information to Instruments.
Also, there are some handy one-liners.
You can call ob-c collecting enable from the debugger
and find out, are we really running the collector?
Sometimes things don't happen like you expect,
because you're not actually running the collector.
CFGetRetainCount tells you if an object has
a retain, therefore, it's not going away.
Malloc side, you can call on any kind of allocate
pointer, malloc, or the collector's memory.
It works with either one.
Tells you how big the object is.
And objc is finalized, you can use during
finalization and find out if a particular object,
your object references, is about
to be finalized, is going away.
You can use that to find out whether it's safe
to store that object or do other operations.
So we have some environment variables
to highlight the important ones.
Auto-use guard is now available, which gives you
guard pages and always allocates at least two pages,
puts your object in the first one, and
allocates a read-only page after it.
Great for detecting buffer runs.
Got to have a lot of memory, but it can be really handy.
There's also auto-reference count logging, which
as I said earlier enhances the malloc history.
It will give you all of the activity the
collector observed for reference counting.
And it only logs the information that the GC itself sees.
When you're using CFRetain, only the first CFRetain
on an object will actually talk to the collector.
So it's actually kind of handy, because it's going
to be less voluminus to go through those logs.
So the collector is now open source.
We released the 10.5.3 version of it late last year.
It's the version of the collector that
was shipped as part of 10.5.3 Leopard.
And here's the link to it.
It's released under the Apache
Open Source License Version 2.
And it's not just for Objective-C.
It's the collector's, actually, language diagnostic.
The open source project Mac Ruby is using it, and
we'd like to encourage other projects to use it too.
So if you're interested in doing
that, please contact Michael Jurewitz.
His contact information will come
up at the end, and let us know.
In March we presented our extensions to C,
including Garbage Collection and Blocks in a paper
to the C Standards Committee, to the working group.
And there was interest in it.
And -- if you're interested in it yourself, I've published
the link to that paper on there, on their web site.
So thank you very much.
I'd like to invite my colleague now, Blaine
Garst, to come up and tell you all about Blocks.
[ Applause ]
>> Blaine Garst: Thank you, Patrick.
So I want to tell you all about Blocks.
I'm borrowing a few slides from a talk I gave a little bit
earlier this afternoon, but here you're going to learn all
about syntax, you're going to learn
all about lifetime issues,
you're going to learn more about Objective-C specialization.
You're going to learn the full story.
It's not that big, but it's a little bit bigger.
But if you didn't come to my talk
earlier, I want to start over again.
If you've ever programmed with lambdas, then of
course you've been using either Scheme or LISP.
If you programmed in Smalltalk, you
see those things in square brackets,
that funny syntax, and that was called a Block.
It was actually an object for them.
Every if-then-else control structure
kind of thing was an object,
that code in the square brackets was actually a block.
Interesting idea.
In Ruby, we also see this concept coming back again.
And in LISP and in Scheme this concept of having sort of
this function that you pass to somebody was called closure.
And the reason for that was that you got to
carry along the variables locally for you.
But if you're a programmer in C, or one of its related
families, Objective-C or C++, or the union of those two,
Objective-C++, you've been out of luck for a long time.
But no longer.
In Snow Leopard, we have the same kind of a construct.
We call it a Block and it looks like this.
It's the funny ^ symbol ahead of a curly
brace, compound statement, expressionless.
You're creating sort of a local function
and passing it off to something that's going
to do something more interesting
with it that you want done to it.
So in this case, what's going on
is we're carrying along the value D
in that local compound statement kind
of block that you're passing along.
And we do this very efficiently.
Those other languages were not only
garbage-collected, but they were mostly interpreted.
And that's a very big expense.
And of course C is neither garbage
collected nor interpreted.
So we know how to do this in a highly
compiled, highly optimized way.
So let's see how that repeat function might be implemented.
So the syntax we use to declare a block reference is
just like function pointers, except we use the ^ symbol.
So semi-similar syntax and form, it's not so bad.
Except as a parameter you've got to worry
about the return type and the parameters,
and when you're passing one or
when you're trying to declare one.
So we highly recommend that you use a
Typedef to kind of hide the clutter.
And so if you use the Typedef, the implementation
of the repeat function becomes fairly simple.
It's passed in a block, and then it simply calls
it like a function pointer, like a function.
So you know, you can pass parameters, get the results
back, it's very natural to use as well as to create.
So I use Blocks.
It leads to smaller, easier, more precise code.
Who can argue with that?
We found over a hundred uses inside Snow Leopard
already, and boy, we've not closed the book on that yet.
There's going to be even more coming along.
For the most part, we use them for callbacks, we use
them for concurrency, using Grand Central Dispatch,
and we use them for all the 40 years of
accumulated wisdom on how to use closures.
And that is for sort of these iterate,
map, and reduce kinds of stuff.
So I'm not going to touch on these hundred APIs, I'll give
a couple examples here to give you a flavor of what's there.
And you know, all the details of syntax and stuff.
So my canonical example for this is
qsortR, which is the existing way to get
to 50 years worth of collected wisdom on sorting.
So if you have a particular problem where you need to
say, sort according to different parameters, I mean,
not always the same way, then what you have to do is
supply a callback argument to the key start routine,
such that whenever it calls the compare function, and
the compare function takes the left and the right,
it will also then pass you this callback
parameter that you've supplied it.
So in practice, let's say we're trying to sort some kind
of array of people objects, and age first might be one
of the options, it happens sometimes,
and other times other things.
So the first thing you have to do is declare
this custom structure somewhere in your code.
You have to write the custom compare function, which
takes that context pointer, does a lot of casting,
gets to the thing of interest, and does its thing.
You have to in the function that you're using
for qsort, declare that custom structure,
fill it in with the right values, and finally, somewhere,
where you really want to use it, you get to call it.
Well, that's a lot of work, especially
if you change your mind.
You know, how often do you write your
code once and then you're done, right?
You're always modifying your code.
If you have to modify the criteria by
which you sort these things then you've got
to go modify your code in three different places.
Could be in pair files, could be in separate files,
could be bunched here, I mean, it's just a pain.
So the better way to do it is with qsort_b,
which we're introducing in Snow Leopard.
And that is you just simply pass in the things
that are important to qsort, and that is the array,
the number of the elements, the size of
each element, and the comparison block.
And the comparison block just takes the left and the right.
So to use this, you write your qsort_b with the
natural reference to, you know, the age-first thing.
And if you need to change it, you change it.
And there is no Step 2 of course.
Your code is exactly what you want to use for sorting that.
So in general, this is kind of, you know, the callback case.
I spoke about concurrency.
We have a brand new system in Snow
Leopard called Grand Central Dispatch.
And so the idea there is it's really easy to
just kind of push your code off onto a queue,
and then that queue gets serviced
by some thread somewhere, sometime.
And you don't have to worry about it.
So it's just one line of code you can push work off,
and there's a ton of talks on how to program with GCD.
It's really a fun system.
Another one I think we'll all appreciate is the
initialization of a singleton kind of situation.
This is a case where you need to do some code once.
Now how many people enjoy writing
new text, P3 new text declarations.
How many people enjoy using them, how many people
love to put the little if, not singleton, you know,
do this kind of stuff for a little speed enhancement.
Anyway, there's huge debates on this kind of stuff.
Here is the code to get a singleton initialized.
This is it.
There's no fancy initializations, you just pass
dispatch once, the address of the unique thing
that guards your singleton, and then the
block of code that is needed to initialize it.
And the dispatch system inside Grand
Central Dispatch makes it work.
It's fast.
It's faster than thread new text is.
So let's recap a little bit.
What is a block.
So a block is a data structure
It's not a function alone, it is a data structure.
And that data structure references that function
expression, which in truth is, you know,
sort of a hidden function we write for you.
It references that function.
It acts like a function when you invoke it.
It carries along constant versions of the stack local
variables that you use within that block expression.
So in the case earlier, the D variable was
actually made, there was a local copy of it made
when that block was constructed,
when that expression was evaluated.
So it holds const versions.
And that's very cool when you send that off to some other
thread, you carry the memory with you and you get all kinds
of thread core local kinds of benefits,
performance benefits out of that.
Sometimes, though, you do need to mutate
a variable, and const variables if you try
to mutate them are going to give you a compiler warning.
So in the cases where you need to mutate something,
and carry, you know, carry the value back,
we introduce a new construct with the under under
block keyword, and it's called block storage
It's storage class-like register and auto for stack
variables, and static for sort of local globals.
So it's a new storage class within C.
And you use it in that space.
So I mentioned the qsort case,
and that's a synchronous case.
That's where you hand your work off and it comes right back.
But in other callback situations, say with a timer,
you need to hand some code off, and it will come back,
and then that timer is going to fire,
and it needs to execute your block.
So in order to make that happen, the timer
sub system has to make a copy of your block.
And that block copy moves that block onto
the heap and it obeys heap lifetime rules.
And so blocks start out on the
stack, because that's very efficient.
That's how, you know, a huge number of uses are made.
They're synchronous uses, there's
no need to copy it to the heap.
But if there is, they are easily copied to the
heap where they live for as long as you need them.
And so the block subsystem manages the lifetime of all
the variables that it references, and that is a real win.
Because there are many callback APIs that
take these sort of context parameters,
where the lifetime of that context thing, you know, could
be malloced off the heap or who knows what its lifetime is
and how to get rid of it, once
you're done using that callback.
With Blocks, we manage that lifetime
in a very consistent and simple manner.
So here's an example.
I'm going to actually go through this line-by-line.
So the idea here is that we're going to
write a function called find key for value.
We're going to pass in the Cocoa dictionary, and we want to
find the key that matches the value that is sought after.
So we're going to return the results.
So we need a block variable for that.
And we're going to pass a block
of code to the enumerate keys
in objects using block method-that's
a new method in Snow Leopard.
It will pass to the block the pairs, the key and object
pairs, as long as the stop variable is left alone.
So in this case, we want to see whether or not the
object passed in matches the sought after object.
And if it is, we set the result to key, we set the stop
variable to say no more, we're done, quit now, we're happy.
And enumerate keys and objects method
completes, and we return the result.
So there are many different APIs we've added in
Snow Leopard for different kinds of iteration.
It's a great way to express styles of iteration.
For example, with arrays you can pass in a version that
illustrates rate or goes through the array backwards,
and it passes the index in so you know which index it was.
So we have several, quite a few different
blocks APIs, including ones that will go
and do some work for you concurrently in the background.
So there have been talks already on that, and I
encourage you to go explore those to find out,
you know, some really cool ways to use Blocks.
Let's talk a little bit more about block variables.
So they generally, you know, you
allocate them inside, you know,
local function context or actually inside a block itself.
So they're mutable, as I said before.
They're shared both with the stack or the scope of
allocation, as well as any blocks that reference them.
They also start on the stack, so they're very fast.
And we have a couple restrictions on them.
So you can't use variable length arrays on them
because it's hard for us to track that varying number.
You get two kinds of varying arrays.
And the address of currently is implemented,
but not recommended because the address
changes as we move it to the heap.
So let me go back and let's talk about block literals.
But I'm going to talk about lifetime a little bit more also.
But the key thing for creating blocks,
this is the simplest syntax you can use.
It's a ^ and a set of statements.
Now we're trying to do something really nice for you here,
and that is we're going to infer
the return type of the block.
Because it's really kind of a function.
And so we infer the return type simply by the
presence of absence of a return statement.
So that's fine.
In this case, Print F, there's no return
statement in the first one, so it returns a void.
And in the second case, the return type is an integer.
Many blocks take parameters.
No big deal.
Same rules apply about, you know,
inferring the return type of the thing.
We do provide a syntax, though, where
you can explicitly state the return type
that you want out of this block expression.
So in this last example, here's a block that
takes a character and returns a character.
If a character is greater than 0.0, it's going
to return C, which is a type of character.
Otherwise, it's going to return 0.
Well guess what, 0 is of type integer.
So the compiler doesn't like this.
It says you're returning character in one
place, integer in the other, what's the deal.
So it will complain.
There are a couple ways to resolve that dilemma, and
one of them is to specify the return type explicitly,
and that's with that ^char, that first char part is
for that says this thing is returning a character.
So then it uses normal compiler C language type conversion,
implicitly cast that 0 into a character type as it returns.
There are some subtleties, we have
discovered, with inferred return types.
It turns out that a single quoted character is an integer.
Hmm. So if -- you're wanting this block to return a
character, then you can cast the results, and that works.
Or you can supply that, you know, return type parameter.
So these are the 2 styles for resolving these subtleties.
I say subtlety number 1 because there's a subtlety number 2.
A = B is not a bool, is not, you know, it's not a
bool by the B O O L, you know, Cocoa convention,
or a bool as in lower case, it's just an int.
So if you want a bool back, you
have to cast or again redeclare.
There is a subtlety number 3.
This one stumped quite a few of us for a while.
It turns out that enumeration, no matter
how it's initialized, is always an integer.
So if you want to return a long out of this expression --
out of this block, you again-sorry,
solution's on the next slide.
A very pragmatic problem comes in with real Cocoa API.
We have added a new method called sort, using
Comparator or a compensator, is one of those typedefs
that takes a block, you know, comparing two items.
And it returns an NS enumeration result.
Well, an NS enumeration results
happens to be not always an integer.
And so you can get a compiler error
on this, on the 64-bit system.
And so the solution in these cases, in the
first case, you know, casting works pretty well.
But in the second case, you really want to put in as
comparison result, instead of repeating that cast 3 times.
Wherever you use our recommended return results.
So blockdeclare syntax.
I showed you that sort of function pointer style syntax?
Well, okay, remember that.
In Objective-C we use sort of this
abstract declarer form that looks funny,
because we don't normally pass function pointers in,
and you just have to get used to it
if you don't have a typedef handy.
This is the C syntax for declaring an
array of function pointers or blocks.
It's not very pretty.
It gets worse.
If you try to return a function pointer or another block
you've got really funny patterns of parameter lists
of the thing returned, anyway, use typedefs.
We talk about lifetime once again.
If we have a function that's going
to take a block, then what happens?
We declare some memory on the stack, there's room
for local, there's the initial version of the
under under block shared variable, and the block itself.
So if it gets copied to the heap because it
needs to be preserved, what's going to happen?
Well, first of all we're going to
move that under shared variable over.
We have created, when we evaluated that expression, that
block expression, a local copy of the value of local.
Here I represent it as under-bar local.
And that gets copied also.
So every version of the block carries that -- all
the local variables that it's sort of snapped up.
And so things are fine.
We have two situations to think about in
terms of how we get rid of that memory.
So the first one is the function might return.
So of course we let go of our explicit reference
to that now heap version of under under block,
and we return off the stack, and we let the heap version
of the block expression keep track of the memory.
And so that's fine.
Second case, say, the heap object goes away first.
So if the heap's going to go away
first, it lets go of its reference
to the shared variable, the heap object is reclaimed.
But because we're sharing that reference,
the stack still has a valid reference
to even the heap version of the under under block variable.
And that's fine.
When the stack's ready to return, it lets go of that.
The heap memory is reclaimed, and the stack returns,
leaving us in our initial state in both cases.
We take care of this for you.
We never do this copy to the heap for you automatically.
This is always an explicit action on your
part so that you know what's going on.
Now a subsystem might do it on your behalf,
but they make that choice to copy it.
But Blocks behave the same no matter whether they're
still on the stock or whether they're on the heap.
That's a transparency thing for you.
Objective-C special observations.
All Blocks are objects.
All the time.
Even if they're created in C programs.
So here I have a typedef for that
generic work block kind of thing.
So if you want to keep a block and you're in
Objective-C, you can send the copy message to it.
They're like IDs.
You can,no matter what syntax you use, whether
there's the funny caret style stuff or typedef,
you can send the copy message to it directly.
We prefer you to use the copy method because if you use
the system-provided primitive block copy or block release,
the block copies capital block copies, and
the capital block releases have to be matched.
And under GC, they can cause unrecoverable cycles.
That's not good.
So we much prefer the copy method.
Autorelease and release work on them
as well, in the retain/release world.
So as I alluded, you can actually send a copy
message directly to the ^ primitive, that's fine.
The nice thing about being objects, being
copyable objects, is that they participate
as a first class citizen, even with our app property syntax.
So this is a very natural way to just
build one of these blocks as part
of your, you know, as part of your object design.
It's fully supported, synthesized,
all that sort of stuff works.
So when you're in Objective-C, you can
do a lot of fun stuff inside the block.
And this example, we've got a local variable,
we've got one of those under under block variables,
and inside that block expression,
which we're going to be copying,
we use both the A local in the
block bar and what are we doing?
We're actually going to update an instance variable.
Hmm, okay, what happens when that thing is copied.
So A local will be retained if you're using retain release.
That's fine.
That's the way -- that's what we've got
to do to keep it alive if it's going
to persist beyond, you know, the function thing.
Implicitly, because you use my
Ibar, we're going to retain self.
So that let's you modify that instance
variable within that block.
You don't have to play under under
block funny games or anything like that.
So instance variables are directly
-- remain directly mutable.
That under under block object is going to be left alone.
Whatever value it had is going to
be sort of bit copied into the heap.
We've gone around a couple of times with what we should do
there, but this has proved to be pragmatically the hands
down winner as to how we want to operate on under
under block variables when they're objects themselves.
Hmm. Some surprises you might run into.
We did. A block reference isn't quite a void *.
So I tell you, in my code I go %P and then the compiler gets
mad at me all the time so I have to put void ** in there.
Hmm, maybe that will get fixed someday.
I don't know.
We've implemented blocks such that the stack
version of a block can be retained and released.
So you can stick it inside, you know, as
a retained property of some other object;
as long as you let go of it before you're done, this works.
It's not that recommended though, because big --
lots of crashes and booms can happen
if you're not very careful about that.
For standard practice, you should do the copy.
And if, you know, you're under-in this case,
it's sort of like an instance variable,
so release it before you reset it.
So copy is the primitive to use.
Copies of blocks that are already on the heap are cheap.
So don't be afraid to use copy here.
Another subtlety that came up is
reflected in this by analogy.
So as C programmers, we're very
conscious of stack-allocated memory.
So if I had an array of pointers to things and I allocated
inside that 4 loop, a structure, and remember the pointer,
are we going to get 10 different versions of that?
No. We're going to get a pointer to dangling memory.
10 copies of that pointer to dangling
memory, and things are going to go boom.
Or if they don't go boom, you wish they would have
gone boom, because something funny is going to happen.
So the same thing is going to happen with Blocks.
If you try to capture blocks inside
either an if statement, you know, an if...
then...else compound statement, or inside a for
loop, it's going to sort of not work, you know.
It's going to go boom.
And the answer here, of course, is to make a copy, to try to
capture all the locality of each version of that iteration.
You're going to need to copy them to preserve them.
And if you're not using a Garbage Collection, you'll
need to remember to do releases on them as well.
I saw this once, thought it was worth telling you about.
In this case, we're trying to build
a smart kind of logging function.
And only sometimes do we use this
boilerplate method, or a boilerplate object.
But when this block that uses that gets copied, the runtime
doesn't know that you're not going to use it sometimes.
It's always going to try to copy the
value of that boiler plate variable.
In this case, it's uninitialized.
And so you get a big memory smash,
or something happens that's bad.
So you know, this might be obvious
after 20 minutes of thinking about it.
But if you remember this, and it happens to you,
hopefully it will take less than 20 minutes.
Debugging, I just have a really easy story to say.
It just works.
These block expressions are as I said
copied by the compiler into a function.
It's very much like that sorting Example:
the Compiler generates a custom structure,
it allocates one right near where
you use it, fills it all in.
But from the debugging view point, you know, you can set
break points in the middle of them, the local variables look
like -- I mean, all the variables you capture show up
just the way you want them to, and it's really nice.
And Instruments does a great job of
monitoring Blocks use within GCD.
So we've gotten full support of Blocks for C and
Objective-C in both GCC 4.2, and the new compiler, Clang.
Our support for C++ is not as complete.
I'm sorry.
I wish it were.
But there's only so many hours in the day
and there is preliminary support available,
but don't start a huge project
expecting - anyway, be careful.
We have published the specification
externally as part of the Clang open source.
As of four hours ago, we have published the runtime as well.
We like the idea of people using
blocks in places other than Apple,
and we're trying to really put
some meat behind that statement.
So much so that in fact in addition to Garbage Collection,
we presented Blocks to the C Standards Committee.
The C Standards Committee reaction was kind of interesting.
They then -- taken a lot of work that's been
falling out of the C++ standardization efforts,
and there's a C++ kind of idea around closures, which they
call lambdas, but lambdas can't really be copied and stored
and used as callbacks, there's those timer things.
They only work in the synchronous cases.
We think that Blocks are far more versatile, and it turns
out they're kind of, you know, compatible and interoperable.
So we don't see this as a collision.
But from the C perspective, we can implement Blocks in C
whereas the lambda proposal cannot be brought back to C.
So we'll see what happens with this.
More information, of course, contact Michael Jurewitz,
who is actually not going to be here today for this talk.
Under documentation there's a Cocoa programming topics area,
and then there's a sub-topic, the Objective-C language,
and under there are 3 other docs that all describe
stuff that Patrick talked about, garbage collection,
the new runtime, we've got lots of APIs in our new runtime,
and then of course we have a good
document on Blocks themselves.